@section darkfpn Dark Fixed Pattern Noise
Pixels in a hardware photosensor cannot be manufactured exactly the same from
perfectly pure materials. There will always be variations in the photo detector
area that are spatially uncorrelated\cite{ccduncorrelated}, surface defects at
the \f$SiO_2/Si\f$ interface\cite{sakaguchidarkcurrentreduction}, and discrete
randomly-distributed charge generation centres\cite{baer2006model}. These
defects provide a mechanism for thermally-excited carriers to move between the
valence and   conduction bands. Consequently, the average dark   signal is not
uniform but has a spatially-random and fixed-pattern noise (FPN) structure.  The
dark current FPN can be expressed as follows:

\f$ \sigma_{d.FPN} = t_I D_R \cdot D_N,\f$

where \f$t_I\f$ is the integration time, \f$D_R\f$ is the  average dark current,
and \f$D_N\f$ is the dark current FPN factor that is typically \f$0.1\dots 0.4\f$ for CCD and CMOS sensors. 

There are also so called ``outliers'' or ``dark
spikes''\cite{janesick2010fundamental}; that is, some pixels generate a dark
signal values much higher than the mean value of the dark signal. The mechanism
of such ``dark spikes'' or ``outliers'' can be described by the Poole-Frenkel
effect (increase in emission rate from a defect in the presence of an electric
field). 


@subsection darkfpnsimulaiton Simulation of dark current fixed pattern noise 
The dark current Fixed Pattern Noise (FPN) is simulated using non-symmetric
distributions to account for the ``outliers'' or ``hot pixels''. It is usually
assumed that the dark current FPN can be described by Gaussian distribution.
However, such an assumption provides a poor approximation of a complicated noise
picture. This is shown in the experimental results in
Subsection~\ref{subsec:darkfpnperf}.

\label{review:31-6R1}Studies show\cite{comprehcmosmodel,baer2006model} that a
more adequate model of dark current FPN is to use non-symmetric probability
distributions. The concept is to use two distributions to describe very
``leaky'' pixels that exhibit higher noise level than others. The first
distribution is used for the main body of the dark current FPN, with a uniform
distribution  superimposed to model ``leaky'' pixels. For  simulations at
room-temperature (\f$25^\circ\f$ C) authors in\cite{comprehcmosmodel} use a
\textit{logistic distribution}, where a higher proportion of the population is
distributed in the tails\cite{balakrishnanlogisticshandbook}. For higher
temperatures, inverse Gaussian\cite{chhikara1989inverse} and
Log-Normal\cite{aitchison1957lognormal} distributions have been proposed. It was
reported~\cite{baer2006model} that the Log-Normal distribution works well for
conventional 3T APS CMOS sensors with comparatively high dark current.

In our simulations we use the Log-Normal distribution for the simulation of dark
current FPN in the case of short integration times, and superimposing other
distributions for long integration times. The actual simulation code implements
various models, including Log-Normal, Gaussian, and Wald distribution to elumate
the dark current FPN noise for short- and long-term integration times.

The dark current FPN for each pixel of the matrix \f$I_{dc.shot.e^-}\f$ from
Eq.~\ref{eq:dshotnoisesimulation} is computed as follows:

\f$I_{dc.FPN.e^-}  = I_{dc.shot.e^-}  + I_{dc.shot.e^-} \cdot ln\mathcal{N}(0,\sigma_{dc.FPN.e^-}^2)\f$

where \f$\sigma_{dc.FPN.e^-} = t_I D_R  D_N\f$, \f$D_R\f$ is the average dark current, and
\f$D_N\f$ is the dark current FPN factor. Since the dark current FPN does not
change from one frame to the next,  the matrix \f$ln \mathcal{N}\f$ is
calculated once and then can be re-used similar to the PRNU simulations in
Subsection~\ref{subsec:prnusimulation}. 

The experimental results confirm that non-symmetric models, and in particular
the Log-Normal distribution,  adequately  describe the dark current FPN in CMOS
sensors, especially in the case of a long integration time (longer than 30-60
seconds). Our results are consistent with\cite{baer2006model}; however, using only one distribution cannot
adequately describe the dark current FPN statistics. For long-exposure case, one
needs to superimpose two (or more, depending on the sensor) probability
distributions.
